as you may have noticed commercial real
estate is changing as more employers
Embrace a work from home hybrid model a
growing number of companies are not
renewing their leases that's leaving
empty office space and surrounding
businesses that rely on those nearby
workers are starting to feel the impact
what does this mean for the future of
downtowns and cities across the country
in tonight's Prime Focus Alexis
christopherus travels to Boston to see
how some empty real estate is finding
new life and how businesses are adapting
to the changes
when Dave seavoy bought his favorite bar
and grill in downtown Boston it was a
dream come true this was home PR and it
didn't matter where you worked what you
did who you were was such a Melting Pot
I fell in love with the place a
neighborhood mainstate silvertone has
been compared to that other Boston
[Music]
bar wherever everyone knew your
name you got a beer and a shot for n
bucks you don't see them on the wall but
a lot of best of Boston Awards a hit
with the business crowd office workers
made up 50% of seavo customers but all
that changed with the covid-19 pandemic
I used to call them suits the office
guys the finance guys and everything and
this was their place and not anymore
they still work from home if people come
to the city now they work maximum three
days a week
it proved too much for silvertone and
after 27 years eight of those years with
seavoy as owner the bar announced last
call in
May I'd imagine it was emotional to lock
this place up and give it
up it's hard to talk about feel like a
failure you know to your employees I had
like 30 staff before we we closed and
you reopen with like 12 people you can't
give them enough
hours across the country once bustling
business districts have become ghost
towns the pandemic proving many jobs can
be done remotely this is a nail in the
coffin for that very
traditional very business office Centric
neighborhood office vacancies in the US
are at a 30-year High more than 900
million square ft of office space empty
enough to fill New York City's One World
Trade Center 300 times Amazon City Group
Walmart and UPS among the major
companies now requiring employees spend
more time in the office some companies
pulling out all the stops to entice
workers back to the office things that
get employees out of their sweatpants
get on the train and come into the city
anything from massage rooms Healthcare
on site uh personal gym
opportunities most experts agree hybrid
and remote work is here to stay
companies don't need office space in the
way that they needed office space 10
years ago 20 years ago 50 years ago um
remote work has just transformed that
landscape from Boston to Austin to
Chicago major cities across the country
reporting at or near record levels of
empty offices for example in San
Francisco more than 22% of offices are
vacant compared with with just about 9%
in 2019 some cities now in danger of
falling into What's called the economic
Doom Loop when high vacancies send
property values plummeting leaving
cities with less tax revenue for things
like Schools Police and sanitation
making them less desirable to live
in would you consider the high vacancy
rates here in Boston at crisis mode
right now Boston is closer to crisis
mode than other cities because it is so
dependent on taxes from commercial real
estate much more than most other cities
twice as dependent as virtually any
other city in the country Evan harowitz
of the center for State policy analysis
at tus researched the fiscal Fallout of
Boston's empty offices Office Buildings
are much much less valuable than they
used to be so this part of the city that
has been a Golden Goose for the city for
for two decades is now gone hello mayor
woo hello Boston mayor Michelle woo Who
is up for reelection next year knows
there's a lot at stake we are at a true
inflection point in our national economy
mayor woo stepping in with tax breaks
and Zoning changes to replace unwanted
office space with much needed housing we
have about 500 housing units that are
now in the pipeline to be converted out
of formally vacant Office Buildings and
we're taking City buildings like
libraries that need Renovations and
adding housing on top of that and
improving our processes making it faster
than ever before more predictable than
ever before to get your build built and
to get those shovels in the ground the
more that downtown is a residential
thriving busy neighborhood just like
every other one of our neighborhoods the
more everyone
benefits it's already being done in
cities like Cleveland where 11% of
Office Inventory is currently being
converted into housing similar
conversions are happening in Cincinnati
Houston and New York where the landmark
flat iron office building will soon be
luxury condos this is a challenge that's
affecting every city in America and in
Boston we're showing that it's also an
opportunity an opportunity David graany
is seizing on we're very thoughtful
investors his real estate investment
firm Synergy has bought 35 properties in
the Greater Boston area four of them in
just the past 12 months you're one of
the only real estate firms buying up
buildings when others are looking to get
out of the market yeah what do you say
to people who say Dave granny is crazy
great keep saying it because that means
I can continue to buy the buildings with
less competition graany says the worst
is over in terms of office vacancies and
he's positive about the future of cities
will downtown office areas in cities
across the country really ever be the
same or or are they changed forever the
great thing about cities is that cities
evolve right you may see more
residential uses more Hospitality more
institutional uses but the office
component of downtowns I believe will
continue to be a very big
factor I mean I have to think this is
one of the of the portfolio business
districts of the future reimagined as
247 neighborhoods where people will work
live eat and play there are lots of ways
to build a vibrant downtown that doesn't
involve uh the central role of Office
Buildings it could be Apartments it
could be lab space it could be you know
there are lots of other things you can
do with land that makes people want to
go downtown and enjoy
themselves working out of the same
building grainy recently bought Brothers
Michael and amelo Riri are betting on a
comeback for Boston's
downtown have a good afternoon for three
decades they've been serving up
breakfast and lunch to the office crowd
thank you office workers were a big part
of your business how
big 75 80% and
now maybe 50 maybe 50 so then how do you
make up for that lost revenue for those
lost
sales we've been doing more deliveries
or the construction guys have actually
kept us going they've also reduced their
staff trimmed their menu and shortened
their hours to make ends meet confident
things will turn around I'm an eternal
optimist and the buildings are way too
expensive to just stay empty so
someone's going to take over the space
so we're
hopeful holding on to hope our thanks to
Alexis christopherus for that